## Introduction to Computer Vision

Computer vision is an area of study that is trying to make computers detect what the picture shows.

### Digital pictures

A digital picture is made of discrete points called pixels. Pixels can be thought of as two dimensional arrays or a
hilly three dimensional planes. If a picture has colour, each pixel has three values, red, blue and green. These
values range from 0 to 255. If a picture is colourless, each pixel has only one value. Pictures that don't have
colour are called black and white or grayscale pictures. Pixel values are sometimes called intensities.

A two by two grayscale picture made up of four pixels:
+-----+-----+
| 090 | 055 |
+-----+-----+
| 000 | 155 |
+-----+-----+

### Naivly comparing pictures

A naive way of comparing pictures would be to compare them pixel by pixel. This method only works if the pictures
are identical. If one picture is only slightly rotated or a zoomed in version of the other picture, then the
comparison isn't going to work. Moreover, this method cannot identify the subject of the picture (an aeroplane, an
aerodrome, a person or ...?).

### Comparing pictures

Pictures can be compared by describing a distinct area of a picture in such a way that it can be compared with other
areas in other pictures. This comparsion is executed in three steps: in the detection step, the algorithm tries to
find destinct pixels in the picture; in the description step, the area around the distinct pixels is described; and
in the matching step, described areas are compared.

### Detector step

Before an area of a picture can be described, distinct pixels have to be found. These pixels are called interest
points or keypoints. They are found using a detector, an algorithm that searches for interest points. Interest
points are most commonly found around blobs, T-junctions and corners. The most important feature of a detector is
its reliability, that is, how often can it find interest points in a picture even if the viewing condictions are
slightly changed.

### Descriptor step

After interest points have been found, the area around each one should be described. Description is performed by
a descriptor, an algorithm that will create a feature vector, a 1 by N matrix, where N is the number of features. A
feature vector is geometrically interpreted as a point in N dimensional space. Feature vectors have to be distinct
and robust to noise, yet they should have only a small number of features. Features hold the information that
describes the area around the interest point.

### Matching step

After feature vectors have been created, they are matched againt other feature vectors that have been extracted from
another picture. If the feature vectors have many features, this step will take a long time to compute. Feature 
vectors (data points in N dimensional space) are matched based on distance from each other and if they are above a
cetain threshold.
